---
title: An Application Layer Interface for Non-IP device control (NIPC)
abbrev: NIPC
docname: draft-ietf-asdf-nipc-03
submissionType: IETF
category: std

ipr: trust200902
keyword: Internet-Draft

stand_alone: no
pi: [toc, sortrefs, symrefs]

author:
 - 
    ins: B. Brinckman
    name: Bart Brinckman
    org: Cisco Systems
    city: Brussels
    country: Belgium
    email: bbrinckm@cisco.com
 -
    ins: R. Mohan
    name: Rohit Mohan
    org: Cisco Systems
    street: 170 West Tasman Drive
    code: 95134
    city: San Jose
    country: USA
    email: rohitmo@cisco.com
 -
    ins: B. Sanford
    name: Braeden Sanford
    org: Philips
    city: Cambridge
    country: USA
    email: braeden.sanford@philips.com

informative:
  BLE53:
    title: Bluetooth Core Specification, Version 5.3
    author:
      -
        org: Bluetooth SIG
    date: 2021
  Zigbee22:
    title: zigbee Specification, Version 22 1.0
    author:
      -
        org: Connectivity Standards Alliance
    date: 2017


--- abstract

This memo specifies RESTful application layer interface for gateways 
providing operations against non-IP devices. The described interface is
extensible. This memo initially describes Bluetooth Low Energy and 
Zigbee as they are the most commonly deployed.

--- middle


# Introduction

## Scope

Low-power sensors, actuators and other connected devices introduced in
environments and use cases such as building management, healthcare, workplaces,
manufacturing, logistics and hospitality are often battery-powered. Often they
do not support wireless of wired interfaces that support the IP protocol.
Most of these environments however mainly support IP-based networking
infrastructure. Therefore, applications on the IP network that aim to
communicate or receive telemetry from these non-IP low-power devices must do
so through a gateway function on the IP network. This gateway functions then 
translates the communication to the non-IP protocol that the low-power device 
supports. Promiment examples of such protocols are {{BLE53}} and {{Zigbee22}}.

~~~~~
                                                               
    +-------------+              +---------+              +--------+
    | Application |<------------>| Gateway |<------------>| Non-IP |                     
    |    app      |   IP-based   |         |    Non-IP    | Device |
    +-------------+   Operation  +---------+   Operation  +--------+                 

~~~~~
{: #gw title="Gateway for non-IP Devices"}

There have been efforts to define Gateway functions for devices that support
a particular protocol, such as a BLE GATT REST API for BLE Gateways
({{https://www.bluetooth.com/bluetooth-resources/gatt-rest-api/}}), however 
they have been limited to a single protocol or a particular use case. In
absence of an open standard describing how applications on an IP network
communicate with non-IP devices, bespoke and vendors specific implementations
have proliferated. This results in parallel infrastructure of both gateways 
and non-IP networks being deployed on a case by case basis, each connecting
separately into the IP network, with a distinct set of APIs. At the same time,
wireless access points supporting IP-based wireless connectivity are deployed
ubiquitiously. Many of these wireless access points are equipped with multiple
wireless radios, of different types. These radios can transmit and receive
different frame types, such as {{BLE53}} and {{Zigbee22}}. This specification
aims to define a Gateway API for these Non-IP protocols that can be leveraged
by this wireless infrastructure in order to connect Non-IP devices into IP
networks.

A standardized Non-IP Gateway interface has following benefits:

 - Avoid the need for parallel Non-IP infrastructure.
 - Avoid the need for applications to perform bespoke integrations for
   different environments.
 - Faster and more cost-effective adoption of Non-IP devices in IP network
   environments.

## Non-IP Gateway functions

A non-IP gateway MUST provide at least following functions:

 - Authentication and authorization of application clients that
   will leverage the gateway API to communicate with Non-IP devices.
 - The ability to onboard Non-IP devices on the Non-IP Gateway. Onboarding 
   ensures that the Non-IP Gateway can identify a device and has sufficient
   context about the device to service gateway API requests. It also ensures
   segmentation of devices that were onboarded by particular applications.
 - A persistent inventory of onboarded devices  mapping to the application
   that onboarded them and the access point/radio that is serving them.
 - An API that allows for bi-directional communication to non-IP devices.
 - One or more channels to process requests, responses, and asymmetric
   communications with the non-IP radio resources (Access Points)
   in its inventory.
 - The ability to stream telemetry received from non-IP devices in real-time
   to applications on the IP network.

The onboarding function is out of scope of this document, but can be provided
by a provisioning interface such as {{!RFC7644}} leveraging 
{{!I-D.ietf-scim-device-model}}. All other defined functions are
supported by Non IP-Control (NIPC).

The Application gateway is a network function, so its goal is to proxy payloads 
between Non-IP and IP networks. It is not intended to be a middleware function
that interprets, decodes or modifies these payloads.

~~~~~

                            +-----------------------------------+
                            |                                   |
    +-----------+   Request |  +---------+                      |
    | onboarding|------------->|  SCIM   |                      |
    |    app    |<-------------| Server  |                      |
    +-----------+  Ctrl Endpt  +---------+                      |
                            |                                   |
    +-----------+           |  +------------+  +-------+  +--+  |
    |  Control  |>...REST...|.>|            |..|  AP   |..|D |  |
    |     &     |           |  |   Gateway  |  +-------+  +--+  |
    | Telemetry |<...MQTT...|.<|            |                   |
    |    Apps   |           |  +------------+                   |
    +-----------+           |                                   |
                            |       Network Deployment          |
                            +-----------------------------------+

~~~~~
{: #arch title="Basic Architecture"}

{{arch}} shows us applications, the application layer gateway (ALG),
an access point (AP), and a device (D). The applications, application layer
gateway and access point are deployed on an IP-Network. The AP also has a
Non-IP interface, which it uses to communicate with the device.
The Application is deployed in a different administrative domain than the
network elements (ALG & AP).
The role of the ALG is to provide a gateway function to applications wishing
to communicate with non-IP devices in the network domain served by the ALG.
Applications implementing Non-IP Control can leverage RESTful interfaces
to communicate with Non-IP devices in the network domain and subscribe to
events levering MQTT.

## Interaction flow

In order to enable a network wishing to offer NIPC ALG functions, the network
administrator authorizes application(s) to perform operations on the Gateway.
This happens out of band and may be accomplished by means of exchanging tokens
or public keys.
Authorization can be role-based. The 3 primary roles are:  

1. Onboarding: Authorize an onboarding application against a SCIM server
   co-located with the gateway.  
2. Control: Authorize applications that may control devices.
3. Data: Authorize applications that may receive telemetry.  
It is possible to further refine roles down to an API basis.

Applications can perform the API requests they were authorized for.
In order for application to perform a NIPC operation on a device, the device
must be first onboarded, for example by means of SCIM.

Previous steps are prerequisites and not within the scope of this specification, 
but are provided for context. Subsequent operations are defined by NIPC.

1. An application authorized for Control can perform NIPC calls to the
   gateway in order to establish bi-directional communication to one or more
   devices. Optionally, also set up a publish/subcribe topic to receive
   streaming data from a device (telemetry interface).
2. An application authorized can receive streaming data on a pub/sub 
   topic configured by the control interface (telemetry interface).

## Terminology

The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
"SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "NOT RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and
"OPTIONAL" in this document are to be interpreted as described in BCP
14 {{!RFC2119}} {{!RFC8174}} when, and only when, they appear in all
capitals, as shown here.

# Architecture

## Overview

Non-IP protocols, such as BLE or Zigbee, typically define a number of basic
operations that are similar across protocols. Examples of this are read and 
write data. NIPC leverages a unified API to support those operations.

NIPC defines actions, which are implemented as REST over HTTP request-response
APIs. NIPC Also defines events, which are implemented as MQTT topics.

In case NIPC is not leveraged in combination with a data model such as ASDF
{{!I-D.ietf-asdf-sdf}}, which can define the properties of a devices,
NIPC also support registrations. Registrations perform mapping of 
properties to protocol-specific attributes.

All operations pertain to a devices or a group of devices, which are addressed
by UUIDs. These UUID's were generated at time of onboarding and returned to 
the application, for example in a SCIM response.

 
## NIPC Operations

NIPC adheres to nomenclature defined by Semantic Definition Format (SDF) for
Data and Interactions of Things {{!I-D.ietf-asdf-sdf}}. Therefore NIPC
defines actions and events on properties. 

### Actions

NIPC supports 3 types of actions:

 - connection: Allows an application to establish to manage connections with
   a device (if so required by the technology).
 - property: Allows applications to read or write device properties. In case
   the property supports streaming data, a subscription property can be
   managed.
 - broadcast: This allows the application to send a broadcast message to a
   device or group of devices.

### Registrations

In absence of a model such as SDF that defines device properties, NIPC allows
an application to register them. NIPC defines 2 types of registrations:

 - property: Manage registrations of properties and their protocol mappings.
   For example, a property called temperature can be mapped to a BLE Service
   Characteristic.
 - event: Manage registrations of events and their MQTT properties such as 
   MQTT topic definition.

### Extensions

The final set of operations are not fundamental NIPC operations, but are
extensions. Extensions are compound API's. They leverage basic NIPC operations
but combine multiple operations in to one API call for efficiency.
An example of this is the the bulk operation, allowing to send multiple
operations in one operation. Extension allows for extensions, either generic
extensions that are IANA registered, or vendor specific extensions 

### Events

Events are published over MQTT. Events can be normal sreaming data, but also
broadcasts or connection events.

## Protocols

NIPC actions, registrations and extensions are request/response APIs. They make
use of a JSON schema over RESTful HTTP{{!RFC9114}}. 

NIPC events are encoded in CBOR ({{!RFC8949}}) and delivered over MQTT.

## Schema

### Device schema

Most operations (except registations) are executed against a device or a group.
NIPC operations refer to either of these as "Object" with an ID as an
identifier. The common schema for Object is defined as follows:

| Attribute     | Req |   Type  |          Example                     |
+---------------+-----+---------+--------------------------------------|
| id            |  T  |  uuid   | 12345678-1234-5678-1234-56789abcdef4 |
| type          |  T  |  enum   | device, group                        |
| technology    |  F  |  enum   | ble, zigbee                          |
{: #objectdef title="Definition of an Object"}

where-

 - id is the unique uuid of the device. This is generated when registering
   the device, for example against a SCIM server. As such this ID is known
   both to the application as well as the NIPC Server. 
 - type is either "group" or "device".
 - technology is the radio technology supported by the device. The mappings
   defined in this spec are "ble" or "zigbee". Mappings are extendable to 
   new technologies.

Example device object:

~~~~~
{
  "id": "12345678-1234-5678-1234-56789abcdef4",
  "type": "device",
  "technology": "ble",
}
~~~~~
{: #exdevobj title="Example device object"}

### Property mapping {#propertymap}

An object can support one or more communications protocols. Even though Non-IP
communications protocols all perform operations on properties, implementations
differ between protocols. For example BLE will address a property as a service
characteristic, while a property in Zigbee is addressed as a property in a 
cluster of an endpoint. 

In order for NIPC to support protocol-agnostic APIs, a property mapping is
required between a NIPC property and a protocol-specific property. A property
mapping can be done by means of a property registration API.

Property mapping allows for integration of new protocols in NIPC, new mappings 
can be created without the need to update the base schema.

~~~~~

     - property
        |
        |> BLE
        |     - BLE property
        |
        |> Zigbee
              - Zigbee property

~~~~~
{: #propmap title="Property Mapping"}

As shown in {{propmap}}, protocol-specific properties must be described in a
protocol object, for example a "ble" or a "zigbee" object.


| Attribute | Req |   Type  |          Example                         |
+-----------+-----+---------+------------------------------------------|
| ble       |  T  |  object | an object with BLE-specific attributes   |
| zigbee    |  T  |  object | an object with Zigbee-specific attributes|
{: #proobj title="Protocol objects"}

where-

 - "ble" is an object containing properties that are specific to the BLE
   protocol.
 - "zigbee" is an object containing properties that are specific to the
   Zigbee protocol.
 - Other protocol mapping objects can be added by creating a new protocol
   object

Example property mapping:

~~~~~
{
  "propertyID": "temperature",
  "ble": {
    "serviceID": "12345678-1234-5678-1234-56789abcdef4",
    "characteristicID": "12345678-1234-5678-1234-56789abcdef4",
    "long": false
  }
}
~~~~~
{: #expropmap title="Example property mapping"}

Protocol mapping allows applications to perform a one-time registration to
a propertyID for a property, and leverage the propertyID in all API calls 
that perform an operation on this property. It might be useful for applications
to directly use protocol objects in action API's as well, therefore there are 
a limited set of API's available that have protocol objects directly embedded 
in the API, in order to perform operations on properties without having to 
first register them.

### Response

As most operations have a common base schema, based on a device ID and a
property, so do responses. Every NIPC API returns a status in the response, as
well as a requestID, which allows for tracking and logging of requests and 
responses. If the operation was performed on a device or group, the ID is also
returned. If the operation is to read or write a property, the resulting value
is also returned. 

Success response:

| Attribute     | Req |   Type  |           Example                    |
+---------------+-----+---------+--------------------------------------|
| status        |  T  |  enum   | SUCCESS                              |
| id            |  F  |  uuid   | 12345678-1234-5678-1234-56789abcdef4 |
| requestID     |  F  |  uuid   | abcd0987-1234-5678-1234-56789abcdef4 |
{: #success title="Success response"}

Example success response:

~~~~~
{
  "status": "SUCCESS",
  "requestID": "12345678-5678-1234-5578-abcdef1234",
  "id": "12345678-1234-5678-1234-56789abcdef4",
}
~~~~~
{: #exsuccess title="Example success response"}

Failure responses additionally include an error code and optionally a reason,
which contains a textual explanation of the error.

Failure response:

| Attribute     | Req |   Type  |           Example                    |
+---------------+-----+---------+--------------------------------------|
| status        |  T  |  enum   | SUCCESS                              |
| id            |  F  |  uuid   | 12345678-1234-5678-1234-56789abcdef4 |
| requestID     |  F  |  uuid   | abcd0987-1234-5678-1234-56789abcdef4 |
| errorCode     |  T  |  int    | 12                                   |
| reason        |  T  |  string | "Not Found"                          |
{: #failure title="Failure response"}

where-

 - status is the status of the request, either "SUCCESS" or "FAILURE". 
   In case of failure an error code and reason are added.
 - id is the id the operation was executed against, found in the request
 - requestID is a correlation ID that can be used for end-to-end 
   tracing.  
 - errorCode is a numerical value representing the error. The various 
   codes are defined in {{errorhandling}}.
 - reason is a human readable explanation of why the error occurred.

Example failure response:

~~~~~
{
  "status": "FAILURE",
  "reason": "Not Found",
  "errorCode": 12,
  "requestID": "12345678-5678-1234-5578-abcdef1234"
}
~~~~~
{: #exfail title="Example failure response"}

# NIPC Actions

The primary goal of NIPC actions is to exchange data with a Non-IP device, by
means of reading, writing or streaming NIPC properties to applications. An
explicit connection may be required, which is also an action. An application
may also want to transmit a broadcast.

## Connections

A connection is an operation that establishes or tears down an association or
connection with a device. Optionally during connection setup properties 
supported by a device can be discovered. 

/action/connection

The connection API allows an application to request to connect to 
a device.

Operations:

 - Connect to a device: POST
 - Return active connections: GET
 - Disconnect a device: DELETE 

### Connection API

#### Connect to a device {#connect}

Method: POST /action/connection

Description: Connect to a device

Parameters: None

Request Body: 

 - an Object, as defined in {{objectdef}} 
 - optionally a set of properties to be discovered. These are supplied
   in protocol objects, as defined in {{proobj}}.
   In the case of BLE, if no protocol object is included, service discovery is 
   performed to discover all supported properties when connecting to
   a device. Optionally, service discovery may be limited to properties 
   defined in the "ble" protocol extension. The services to be 
   discovered can be added in an array. Property discover can be buffered
   across connections, so the API also supports caching parameters. 
 - Connection retry parameters 

Example body of a connection without specific discovery of properties:

~~~~~
{
  "id": "12345678-1234-5678-1234-56789abcdef4",
  "type": "device",
  "technology": "ble",
  "retries": 3,
  "retryMultipleAPs": true
}
~~~~~
{: #exconn title="Example Connection"}

where-

 - "id", "type" and "technology" are part of the object definition (device
   or group), as defined in {{objectdef}}. 
 - "retries" defines the number of retries in case the operations does not 
   succeed
 - "retryMultipleAPs" can be used in case there is an infrastructure with 
   multiple access points or radios that can reach the device. If set to "true"
   a different access point may be used for retries.

In case the application would like to discover specific properties of a device,
a protocol object can be added that defines what properties should be
discovered.

Example body of a BLE connection with specific discovery of properties:

~~~~~
{
  "id": "12345678-1234-5678-1234-56789abcdef4",
  "type": "device",
  "technology": "ble",
  "ble": {
    "services": [
      {
        "serviceID": "12345678-1234-5678-1234-56789abcdef4"
      }
    ],
    "cached": false,
    "cacheIdlePurge": 3600,
    "autoUpdate": true,
    "bonding": "default"
  },
  "retries": 3,
  "retryMultipleAPs": true
}
~~~~~
{: #exconnprp title="Example Connection with explicit discovery of connections"}  

where in the BLE protocol object: 

 - "services" is an array of services defined by their serviceIDs.
 - "cached" refers to whether the services need to be cached for 
   subsequent connects, in order not to perform service discovery on
   each request.
 - "cacheIdlepurge" defines how long the cache should be maintained 
   before purging
 - some devices support notifications on changes in services, 
   "autoUpdate" allows the network to update services based on 
   notification (on by default)
 - "bonding" allows you to override the bonding method configured when 
   onboarding the device

Response: 
Success responses include standard success response properties
as defined in {{success}} as well as a protocol object with an array of 
discovered properties, as defined in the specific protocol.
For example, for BLE, this is an array of supported services, which in turn
contains an array of charateristics, which in turn contains an array of
descriptors, as shown in {{BLEservices}}.

~~~~~
    services
     - serviceID
        |
        |> characteristics
            - charactericID
            - flags
               |
               |> Descriptors
                   - descriptorID
~~~~~
{: #BLEservices title="BLE Services"}

Example of a BLE connection response with BLE discovered properties:

~~~~~
{
  "status": "SUCCESS",
  "requestID": "12345678-5678-1234-5578-abcdef1234",
  "id": "12345678-1234-5678-1234-56789abcdef4",
  "ble": [
    {
      "serviceID": "12345678-1234-5678-1234-56789abcdef4",
      "characteristics": [
        {
          "characteristicID": "12345678-1234-5678-1234-56789abcdef4",
          "flags": [
            "read",
            "write"
          ],
          "descriptors": [
            {
              "descriptorID": "12345678-1234-5678-1234-56789abcdef4"
            }
          ]
        }
      ]
    }
  ]
}
~~~~~
{: #exconnresp title="Example Connection response"}

where in the BLE protocol object:

 - "id", "requestID" and "technology" are part of hte standard {{success}} definition 
 - "ble" protocol object conatins an Array of BLE services as shown in
   {{BLEservices}}

A failure will generate a standard failed response. Please refer to {{failure}}
definition of failed response.

#### Return active connections

Method: GET /action/connection

Description: Returns one or more active connections, based on ids 
provided in parameters (none = return all connections).

Parameters, in query: 
One of following options-

 - None: return all active connections for this application 
 - single id: return connection status for this id
 - comma separated ids: return connection status for multiple ids

Response: 
A standard success ({{exsuccess}}) or failure ({{exfail}}) response, including
an array of device objects and their connection status. Success if the device
is connected, failure if the device is not connected.  

Example get connection response:

~~~~~
{
  "status": "SUCCESS",
  "requestID": "12345678-5678-1234-5578-abcdef1234",
  "connections": [
    {
      "status": "SUCCESS",
      "requestID": "12345678-5678-1234-5578-abcdef1234",
      "id": "12345678-1234-5678-1234-56789abcdef4"
    },
    {
      "status": "FAILURE",
      "reason": "Not Found",
      "errorCode": 12,
      "requestID": "12345678-5678-1234-5578-abcdef1234"
    }
  ]
}
~~~~~
{: #exgetresp title="Example Connection response"}

In this example, status of 2 connections was requested. The request was
successfully executed, 1 of the 2 connections was found active, the other
one not.

#### Disconnect a device 

Method: DELETE /action/connection

Description: Disconnect one or more devices, based on ids provided in
parameters

Parameters, in query: 
One of following options-

 - None: Disconnect all devices for connections this application made
 - single id: disconnect device with id
 - comma separated ids: disconnect multiple devices with ids

Response: 
The response for the DELETE function is the same as the response for the GET
function. See {{exsuccess}} for success response, and {{exconnresp}} for failed
responses.

## Properties

Property APIs allow applictions to read and write property values from/to
devices.

/action/property

Operations:

 - Write value: POST
 - Update value: PUT
 - Read value: GET
 - Delete value: DELETE 

### Property API

#### Writing a value {#write}

Method: POST /action/property/

Description: Writes a value to a property

Parameters: None

Request Body: 

 - an Object, as defined in {{objectdef}}
 - A propertyID to write to
 - A value to be written
 - optional parameters

Example body writing a property:

~~~~~
{
  "id": "12345678-1234-5678-1234-56789abcdef4",
  "type": "device",
  "technology": "ble",
  "propertyID": "temperature",
  "value": "dGVzdA==",
  "forcedResponse": true
}
~~~~~
{: #exwrite title="Example writing a property"}

where-

 - "id", "type" and "technology" are part of the object definition (device
   or group), as defined in {{objectdef}}
 - "propertyID" is the ID of a previously registered property mapping
 - "value" is the bytes to be written in base64 encoding
 - "forcedresponse" requests a specific response behavior of the device
   that is not the default

Response:
Success responses include standard success response properties
as defined in {{success}} as well as the propertyID and the value written.

Example of a write property response:

~~~~~
{
  "status": "SUCCESS",
  "requestID": "12345678-5678-1234-5578-abcdef1234",
  "id": "12345678-1234-5678-1234-56789abcdef4",
  "propertyID": "temperature",
  "value": "dGVzdA=="
}
~~~~~
{: #exwrresp title="Example write property response"}

where- 

 - "id", "requestID" and "technology" are part of the standard {{success}} definition 
 - "propertyID" is the ID of a previously registered property mapping
 - "value" is the bytes to be written in base64 encoding
 - "propertyID" is the proper

A failure will generate a standard failed response. Please refer to {{failure}}
definition of failed response.

#### Updating a value {#update}

Method: PUT /action/property

Description: Updates a value of a property 

Parameters: None

Request Body: 

 - an Object, as defined in {{objectdef}}
 - A propertyID to write to
 - A value to be written
 - optional parameters

Example body updating a property:

~~~~~
{
  "id": "12345678-1234-5678-1234-56789abcdef4",
  "type": "device",
  "technology": "ble",
  "propertyID": "temperature",
  "value": "dGVzdA==",
  "forcedResponse": true
}
~~~~~
{: #exupd title="Example updating a property"}

where-

 - "id", "type" and "technology" are part of the object definition (device
   or group), as defined in {{objectdef}}
 - "propertyID" is the ID of a previously registered property mapping
 - "value" is the value to be updated in base64 encoding
 - "forcedresponse" requests a specific response behavior of the device
   that is not the default

Response:
Success responses include standard success response properties
as defined in {{success}} as well as the propertyID and the value updated.

Example of a write property response:

~~~~~
{
  "status": "SUCCESS",
  "requestID": "12345678-5678-1234-5578-abcdef1234",
  "id": "12345678-1234-5678-1234-56789abcdef4",
  "propertyID": "temperature",
  "value": "dGVzdA=="
}
~~~~~
{: #exupresp title="Example update property response"}

where- 

 - "id", "requestID" and "technology" are part of the standard {{success}} definition 

A failure will generate a standard failed response. Please refer to {{failure}}
definition of failed response.

#### Read a property 

Method: GET /action/property/{property}

Description: Read a property from a device

Parameters, in path: 
A propertyID {property} that needs to be read.

Parameters, in query: 
An id of a device on which the property has to be read.

Response:
Success responses include standard success response properties
as defined in {{success}} as well as the propertyID and the value read.

Example of a read property response:

~~~~~
{
  "status": "SUCCESS",
  "requestID": "12345678-5678-1234-5578-abcdef1234",                   
  "id": "12345678-1234-5678-1234-56789abcdef4",                        
  "propertyID": "temperature",
  "value": "dGVzdA=="
}
~~~~~ 
{: #exreresp title="Example read property response"}

A failure will generate a standard failed response. Please refer to {{failure}}
definition of failed response.

#### Delete a property value

Method: DELETE /action/property/{property}

Description: Delete a property value from a device

Parameters, in path:
A propertyID {property} that needs to be deleted..

Parameters, in query:
An id of a device on which the property has to be deleted.

Response:
Success responses include standard success response properties
as defined in {{success}} as well as the propertyID and the value deleted.

Example of a delete property response:

~~~~~
{
  "status": "SUCCESS",
  "requestID": "12345678-5678-1234-5578-abcdef1234",
  "id": "12345678-1234-5678-1234-56789abcdef4",
  "propertyID": "temperature",
  "value": "dGVzdA=="
}
~~~~~
{: #exdelresp title="Example delete property response"}

A failure will generate a standard failed response. Please refer to {{failure}}
definition of failed response.

## Subscriptions

/action/property/subscription

Subscriptions are properties that deliver a data stream instead of a single
value. The property subscription API allows an application to manage these 
data streams.

Operations:

 - Start a subscription data stream: POST
 - Get status of a subscription data stream: GET
 - Stop a subscription data stream: DELETE 

### Property subscription API

#### Starting a subscription data stream 

Method: POST /action/property/subscription

Description: Start a subcription data stream pertaining to a specific 
property

Parameters: None

Request Body: 

 - an Object, as defined in {{objectdef}}
 - A propertyID for which to start the subscription 
 - optional parameters

Example body for starting a subscription of a property:

~~~~~
{
  "id": "12345678-1234-5678-1234-56789abcdef4",
  "type": "device",
  "technology": "ble",
  "propertyID": "temperature",
  "forcedAck": true
}
~~~~~
{: #exstartsub title="Example starting a subscription for a property"}

where-

 - "id", "type" and "technology" are part of the object definition (device
   or group), as defined in {{objectdef}}
 - "propertyID" is the ID of a previously registered property mapping
 - "forcedAck" requests a specific response behavior of the device
   that is not the default

Response:
Success responses is a standard success response when the
subscription is started, as defined in {{success}}. 

A failure will generate a standard failed response. Please refer to {{failure}}
definition of failed response.

#### Get status of a subscription data stream

Method: GET /action/property/subscription/{property}

Description: Gets the status of a subscription data stream, success if
active, failure if not active 

Parameters, in path:
A propertyID {property} for the subscription.

Parameters, in query:
An id of a device on which the subscription has to be started.

Response:
Success responses is a standard success response when the
subscription is started, as defined in {{success}}.

A failure to find the subscription will generate a standard failed response. 
Please refer to {{failure}} definition of failed response.

#### stop a subscription data stream

Method: DELETE /action/property/subscription/{property}

Description: stops a subscription data stream

Parameters, in path:
A propertyID {property} for the subscription.

Parameters, in query:
An id of a device on which the subscription has to be started.

Response:
Success response is a standard success response when the
subscription is deleted, as defined in {{success}}.

A failure to delete the subscription will generate a standard failed response.
Please refer to {{failure}} definition of failed response.

# NIPC Registrations

NIPC allows an application to register properties to use in action API's. NIPC
supports 2 types of registrations: Registrations for properties and 
registrations for events.

## Event registration

/registration/event

The event registration API allows an application to register an event for a
data application to a specified property. This event is mapped to an MQTT
pub/sub topic. By activating a subscription on one or more device(s) for that
property, streaming data will get published to the associated pub/sub topic
on MQTT.

Operations:

 - Register an event: POST
 - Update an event: PUT
 - Get configuration of one or more events: GET
 - Delete an event: DELETE

### Event registration API

#### Registering an event

Method: POST /registration/event

Description: Register an event to a property 

Parameters: None

Request Body:

 - An event name that matches to an MQTT pub/sub topic
 - The data format the event should be delivered in
 - The device or group id the event is valid for
 - Whether the event needs to be cached for replay
 - the data applications that can consume the events

Example body registering an event:

~~~~~
{
  "event": "enterprise/hospital/pulse_oximeter",
  "eventFormat": "default",
  "replay": false,
  "id": "12345678-1234-5678-1234-56789abcdef4",
  "type": "device",
  "dataApps": [
    {
      "dataAppID": "12345678-1234-5678-1234-56789abcdef4",
      "mqtt": {
        "brokerURI": "mqtt.broker.com:8883",
        "username": "user1",
        "password": "password1",
        "brokerCACert": "string"
      }
    }
  ],
  "propertyID": "temperature"
}
~~~~~
{: #exregeve title="Example registering an event"}

where-

 - "event" is the event identifier, which also maps to the MQTT topic name
 - "eventFormat" is the format the data stream is delivered in, either default
   (decorated with id and property) or just the payload 
 - "replay" defines whether the event should be cached for replay or not
 - "id" is hte id of the device or group the event is valid for
 - "type" is the type if the id, either device or group
 - "dataApps" is an array of data appplications that can subscribe to the event
 - "propertyID" is the propertyID that will be used in action APIs to activate
   this event

The dataApps array consists of following-

 - "dataAppID" is the identity of the data application either configured 
   administratively or through SCIM.
 - "mqtt" optional MQTT broker connection parameters, in case an external MQTT
   needs to be configured

Response:
Success responses include standard success response properties
as defined in {{success}} as well as all the attributes that were configured
from the request.

Example of a register event response:

~~~~~
{
  "status": "SUCCESS",
  "requestID": "12345678-5678-1234-5578-abcdef1234",
  "id": "12345678-1234-5678-1234-56789abcdef4",
  "event": "enterprise/hospital/pulse_oximeter",
  "eventFormat": "default",
  "replay": false,
  "type": "device",
  "dataApps": [
    {
      "dataAppID": "12345678-1234-5678-1234-56789abcdef4",
      "mqtt": {
        "brokerURI": "mqtt.broker.com:8883",
        "username": "user1",
        "password": "password1",
        "brokerCACert": "string"
      }
    }
  ],
  "propertyID": "temperature"
}
~~~~~
{: #exregeveresp title="Example register event response"}

where-

 - "id", "requestID" and "technology" are part of the standard {{success}} definition
 - "event" is the event identifier, which also maps to the MQTT topic name
 - "eventFormat" is the format the data stream is delivered in, either default 
   (decorated with id and property) or just the payload
 - "replay" defines whether the event should be cached for replay or not
 - "dataApps" is an array of data appplications that can subscribe to the event
 - "propertyID" is the propertyID that will be used in action APIs to activate
   this event

The dataApps array consists of following-

 - "dataAppID" is the identity of the data application either configured 
   administratively or through SCIM.
 - "mqtt" optional MQTT broker connection parameters, in case an external MQTT
   needs to be configured

A failure will generate a standard failed response. Please refer to {{failure}}
definition of failed response.

#### Updating a topic

Method: PUT /registration/event

Description: Update an existing event 

Parameters: None

Request Body:

 - An event name that matches to an MQTT pub/sub topic
 - The data format the event should be delivered in
 - The device or group id the event is valid for
 - Whether the event needs to be cached for replay
 - the data applications that can consume the events

Example body updating an event:

~~~~~
{
  "event": "enterprise/hospital/pulse_oximeter",
  "eventFormat": "default",
  "replay": false,
  "id": "12345678-1234-5678-1234-56789abcdef4",
  "type": "device",
  "dataApps": [
    {
      "dataAppID": "12345678-1234-5678-1234-56789abcdef4",
      "mqtt": {
        "brokerURI": "mqtt.broker.com:8883",
        "username": "user1",
        "password": "password1",
        "brokerCACert": "string"
      }
    }
  ],
  "propertyID": "temperature"
  "ble": {
    "type": "gatt",
    "serviceID": "12345678-1234-5678-1234-56789abcdef0",
    "characteristicID": "12345678-1234-5678-1234-56789abcdef1"
  }
}
~~~~~
{: #exupdeve title="Example updating an event"}

where-

 - "event" is the event identifier, which also maps to the MQTT topic name
 - "eventFormat" is the format the data stream is delivered in, either default
   (decorated with id and property) or just the payload
 - "replay" defines whether the event should be cached for replay or not
 - "id" is hte id of the device or group the event is valid for
 - "type" is the type if the id, either device or group
 - "dataApps" is an array of data appplications that can subscribe to the event
 - "propertyID" is the propertyID that will be used in action APIs to activate
   this event

The dataApps array consists of following-

 - "dataAppID" is the identity of the data application either configured
   administratively or through SCIM.
 - "mqtt" optional MQTT broker connection parameters, in case an external MQTT
   needs to be configured

The propertyID gets mapped to a protocol-specific property with a 
property mapping, through a protocol object-

Response:
Success responses include standard success response properties
as defined in {{success}} as well as all the attributes that were configured
from the request.

Example of an update register event response:

~~~~~
{
  "status": "SUCCESS",
  "requestID": "12345678-5678-1234-5578-abcdef1234",
  "id": "12345678-1234-5678-1234-56789abcdef4",
  "event": "enterprise/hospital/pulse_oximeter",
  "eventFormat": "default",
  "replay": false,
  "type": "device",
  "dataApps": [
    {
      "dataAppID": "12345678-1234-5678-1234-56789abcdef4",
      "mqtt": {
        "brokerURI": "mqtt.broker.com:8883",
        "username": "user1",
        "password": "password1",
        "brokerCACert": "string"
      }
    }
  ],
  "propertyID": "temperature"
  "ble": {
    "type": "gatt",
    "serviceID": "12345678-1234-5678-1234-56789abcdef0",
    "characteristicID": "12345678-1234-5678-1234-56789abcdef1"
  }
}
~~~~~
{: #exupdeveresp title="Example update event response"}

where-

 - "id", "requestID" and "technology" are part of the standard {{success}} 
   definition
 - "event" is the event identifier, which also maps to the MQTT topic name
 - "eventFormat" is the format the data stream is delivered in, either default
   (decorated with id and property) or just the payload
 - "replay" defines whether the event should be cached for replay or not
 - "dataApps" is an array of data appplications that can subscribe to the event
 - "propertyID" is the propertyID that will be used in action APIs to activate
   this event

The dataApps array consists of following-

 - "dataAppID" is the identity of the data application either configured
   administratively or through SCIM.
 - "mqtt" optional MQTT broker connection parameters, in case an external MQTT
   needs to be configured

The propertyID gets mapped to a protocol-specific property with a
property mapping, through a protocol object-

A failure will generate a standard failed response. Please refer to {{failure}}
definition of failed response.

#### Get configuration of one or more events

Method: GET /registration/event

Description: Gets the configuration of one or more events

Parameters: An event name. Multiple events can be added by comma-separated
attributes. If no parameters are present, all events are returned.

Response: A success response as in {{success}} with a "events" object
containing an array of returned event names with attributes defined in
{{exupdeve}}.

Example of a get event response:

~~~~~
{
  "status": "SUCCESS",
  "requestID": "12345678-5678-1234-5578-abcdef1234",
  "events": [
    {
      "ble": {
        "type": "gatt",
        "serviceID": "12345678-1234-5678-1234-56789abcdef0",
        "characteristicID": "12345678-1234-5678-1234-56789abcdef1"
      },
      "event": "enterprise/hospital/pulse_oximeter",
      "propertyID": "temperature",
      "eventFormat": "default",
      "replay": false,
      "id": "12345678-1234-5678-1234-56789abcdef4",
      "type": "device",
      "dataApps": [
        {
          "dataAppID": "12345678-1234-5678-1234-56789abcdef4",
          "mqtt": {
            "brokerURI": "mqtt.broker.com:8883",
            "username": "user1",
            "password": "password1",
            "brokerCACert": "string"
          }
        }
      ],
      "technology": "ble"
    },
    {
      "zigbee": {
        "endpointID": 1,
        "clusterID": 6,
        "propertyID": 16,
        "type": 1
      },
      "event": "enterprise/hospital/pulse_oximeter",
      "propertyID": "temperature",
      "eventFormat": "default",
      "replay": false,
      "id": "12345678-1234-5678-1234-56789abcdef4",
      "type": "device",
      "dataApps": [
        {
          "dataAppID": "12345678-1234-5678-1234-56789abcdef4",
          "mqtt": {
            "brokerURI": "mqtt.broker.com:8883",
            "username": "user1",
            "password": "password1",
            "brokerCACert": "string"
          }
        }
      ],
      "technology": "ble"
    }
  ]
}
~~~~~
{: #exgeteveresp title="Example get event response"}

where-

 - "id", "requestID" and "technology" are part of the standard {{success}}
   definition
 - "events" is an array of events

where an event-

 - "event" is the event identifier, which also maps to the MQTT topic name
 - "eventFormat" is the format the data stream is delivered in, either default
   (decorated with id and property) or just the payload
 - "replay" defines whether the event should be cached for replay or not
 - "id" is hte id of the device or group the event is valid for
 - "type" is the type if the id, either device or group
 - "dataApps" is an array of data appplications that can subscribe to the event
 - "propertyID" is the propertyID that will be used in action APIs to activate
   this event

The dataApps array consists of following-

 - "dataAppID" is the identity of the data application either configured
   administratively or through SCIM.
 - "mqtt" optional MQTT broker connection parameters, in case an external MQTT
   needs to be configured

The propertyID gets mapped to a protocol-specific property with a
property mapping, through a protocol object-

A failure will generate a standard failed response. Please refer to {{failure}}
definition of failed response.

#### Delete one or more topics

Method: DELETE /registration/event

Description: Delete one or more events

Parameters: An event name. Multiple events can be added by comma-separated
attributes. If no parameters are present, all events are returned.

Response: A success response as in {{success}} with a "events" object
containing an array of returned event names with attributes defined in
{{exupdeve}}.

Example of a delete event response:

~~~~~
{
  "status": "SUCCESS",
  "requestID": "12345678-5678-1234-5578-abcdef1234",
  "events": [
    {
      "ble": {
        "type": "gatt",
        "serviceID": "12345678-1234-5678-1234-56789abcdef0",
        "characteristicID": "12345678-1234-5678-1234-56789abcdef1"
      },
      "event": "enterprise/hospital/pulse_oximeter",
      "propertyID": "temperature",
      "eventFormat": "default",
      "replay": false,
      "id": "12345678-1234-5678-1234-56789abcdef4",
      "type": "device",
      "dataApps": [
        {
          "dataAppID": "12345678-1234-5678-1234-56789abcdef4",
          "mqtt": {
            "brokerURI": "mqtt.broker.com:8883",
            "username": "user1",
            "password": "password1",
            "brokerCACert": "string"
          }
        }
      ],
      "technology": "ble"
    },
    {
      "zigbee": {
        "endpointID": 1,
        "clusterID": 6,
        "propertyID": 16,
        "type": 1
      },
      "event": "enterprise/hospital/pulse_oximeter",
      "propertyID": "temperature",
      "eventFormat": "default",
      "replay": false,
      "id": "12345678-1234-5678-1234-56789abcdef4",
      "type": "device",
      "dataApps": [
        {
          "dataAppID": "12345678-1234-5678-1234-56789abcdef4",
          "mqtt": {
            "brokerURI": "mqtt.broker.com:8883",
            "username": "user1",
            "password": "password1",
            "brokerCACert": "string"
          }
        }
      ],
      "technology": "ble"
    }
  ]
}
~~~~~
{: #exdeleveresp title="Example delete event response"}

where-

 - "id", "requestID" and "technology" are part of the standard {{success}}
   definition
 - "events" is an array of events

where an event-

 - "event" is the event identifier, which also maps to the MQTT topic name
 - "eventFormat" is the format the data stream is delivered in, either default
   (decorated with id and property) or just the payload
 - "replay" defines whether the event should be cached for replay or not
 - "id" is hte id of the device or group the event is valid for
 - "type" is the type if the id, either device or group
 - "dataApps" is an array of data appplications that can subscribe to the event
 - "propertyID" is the propertyID that will be used in action APIs to activate
   this event

The dataApps array consists of following-

 - "dataAppID" is the identity of the data application either configured
   administratively or through SCIM.
 - "mqtt" optional MQTT broker connection parameters, in case an external MQTT
   needs to be configured

The propertyID gets mapped to a protocol-specific property with a
property mapping, through a protocol object-

A failure will generate a standard failed response. Please refer to {{failure}}
definition of failed response.

## Property registration

/registration/property
  
The property registration API allows an application to register a property
mapping against a protocol-specific property as decribed in {{propertymap}}

Operations:

 - Register a property: POST
 - Update a property: PUT
 - Get a property: GET
 - Delete a property: DELETE

### Property registration API

#### Registering a property

Method: POST /registration/property

Description: Register a property mapping to a protocol-specific property

Parameters: None

Request Body:

 - a property ID
 - a protocol object containing a protocol mapping

Example body registering a property:

~~~~~
{
  "propertyID": "temperature",
  "ble": {
    "serviceID": "12345678-1234-5678-1234-56789abcdef4",
    "characteristicID": "12345678-1234-5678-1234-56789abcdef4",
    "long": false
  }
}
~~~~~
{: #exregprop title="Example registering a property"}

where-

 - "propertyID" is the propertyID that will be used in action APIs to refer
   to this property mapping
 - A protocol object with a protocol-specific property map, as decribed in
   {{propertymap}}

Response:
Success responses include standard success response properties
as defined in {{success}} as well as all the attributes that were configured
from the request.

Example of a register property response:

~~~~~
{
  "status": "SUCCESS",
  "requestID": "12345678-5678-1234-5578-abcdef1234",
  "propertyID": "temperature",
  "ble": {
    "serviceID": "12345678-1234-5678-1234-56789abcdef4",
    "characteristicID": "12345678-1234-5678-1234-56789abcdef4",
    "long": false
  }
}
~~~~~
{: #exregpropresp title="Example register property response"}

where-

 - "id", "requestID" and "technology" are part of the standard {{success}}
   definition
 - "propertyID" is the propertyID that will be used in action APIs to refer
   to this property mapping
 - A protocol object with a protocol-specific property map, as decribed in
   {{propertymap}}

A failure will generate a standard failed response. Please refer to {{failure}}
definition of failed response.

#### Updating a property

Method: PUT /registration/property

Description: Update a property mapping to a protocol-specific property

Parameters: None

Request Body:

 - a property ID
 - a protocol object containing a protocol mapping

Example body updating a property:

~~~~~
{
  "propertyID": "temperature",
  "ble": {
    "serviceID": "12345678-1234-5678-1234-56789abcdef4",
    "characteristicID": "12345678-1234-5678-1234-56789abcdef4",
    "long": false
  }
}
~~~~~
{: #exupdprop title="Example registering a property"}

where-

 - "propertyID" is the propertyID that will be used in action APIs to refer
   to this property mapping
 - A protocol object with a protocol-specific property map, as decribed in
   {{propertymap}}

Response:
Success responses include standard success response properties
as defined in {{success}} as well as all the attributes that were configured
from the request.

Example of an update property response:

~~~~~
{
  "status": "SUCCESS",
  "requestID": "12345678-5678-1234-5578-abcdef1234",
  "propertyID": "temperature",
  "ble": {
    "serviceID": "12345678-1234-5678-1234-56789abcdef4",
    "characteristicID": "12345678-1234-5678-1234-56789abcdef4",
    "long": false
  }
}
~~~~~
{: #exupdpropresp title="Example register property response"}

where-

 - "id", "requestID" and "technology" are part of the standard {{success}}
   definition
 - "propertyID" is the propertyID that will be used in action APIs to refer
   to this property mapping
 - A protocol object with a protocol-specific property map, as decribed in
   {{propertymap}}

A failure will generate a standard failed response. Please refer to {{failure}}
definition of failed response.

#### Get property mapping of one or more properties

Method: GET /registration/property

Description: Gets the property mapping of one or more properties

Parameters: A property name. Multiple properties can be added by
comma-separated parameters. If no parameters are present, all properties
are returned.

Response: A success response as in {{success}} with an array of properties,
containing propertyID with protocol object containing a protocol-specific 
property mapping

Example of a get property response:

~~~~~
{
  "status": "SUCCESS",
  "requestID": "12345678-5678-1234-5578-abcdef1234",
  "properties": [
    {
      "ble": {
        "serviceID": "12345678-1234-5678-1234-56789abcdef4",
        "characteristicID": "12345678-1234-5678-1234-56789abcdef4",
        "long": false
      },
      "propertyID": "temperature"
    },
    {
      "zigbee": {
        "endpointID": 1,
        "clusterID": 6,
        "propertyID": 16,
        "type": 1
      },
      "propertyID": "temperature"
    }
  ]
}
~~~~~
{: #exgetpropresp title="Example get property response"}

where-

 - "id", "requestID" and "technology" are part of the standard {{success}}
   definition
 - "properties" is an array of properties

where a property-

 - "id", "requestID" and "technology" are part of the standard {{success}}
   definition
 - "propertyID" is the propertyID that will be used in action APIs to refer
   to this property mapping
 - A protocol object with a protocol-specific property map, as decribed in
   {{propertymap}}

A failure will generate a standard failed response. Please refer to {{failure}}
definition of failed response.

#### Delete property mapping of one or more properties

Method: DELETE /registration/property

Description: Deletes the property mapping of one or more properties

Parameters: A property name. Multiple properties can be added by 
comma-separated parameters. If no parameters are present, all properties
are deleted.

Response: A success response as in {{success}} with an array of properties, 
containing propertyID with protocol object containing a protocol-specific   
property mapping

Example of a delete property response:

~~~~~
{
  "status": "SUCCESS",
  "requestID": "12345678-5678-1234-5578-abcdef1234",
  "properties": [
    {
      "ble": {
        "serviceID": "12345678-1234-5678-1234-56789abcdef4",
        "characteristicID": "12345678-1234-5678-1234-56789abcdef4",
        "long": false
      },
      "propertyID": "temperature"
    },
    {
      "zigbee": {
        "endpointID": 1,
        "clusterID": 6,
        "propertyID": 16,
        "type": 1
      },
      "propertyID": "temperature"
    }
  ]
}
~~~~~
{: #exdelpropresp title="Example delete property response"}

where-

 - "id", "requestID" and "technology" are part of the standard {{success}}
   definition
 - "properties" is an array of properties

where a property-

 - "id", "requestID" and "technology" are part of the standard {{success}}
   definition
 - "propertyID" is the propertyID that will be used in action APIs to refer
   to this property mapping
 - A protocol object with a protocol-specific property map, as decribed in
   {{propertymap}}

A failure will generate a standard failed response. Please refer to {{failure}}
definition of failed response.

# NIPC Extensibility

NIPC is extensible in two ways:
 
 - Protocol mapping: New protocol mapping can extend NIPC with support
   for new non-IP protocols
 - API extensions: API extensions leverage compound statements of basic NIPC
   action APIs to simplify common operations for applications.
 
## Protocol extensions

As described in {{propertymap}} NIPC supports mapping protocol specific
mapping to NIPC properties. BLE and Zigbee are used as examples, but protocol
mapping is extensible to other protocols, so noew non-IP protocols can be 
supported by NIPC without a schema change.

~~~~~

     -  property
        |
        |> BLE
        |     - BLE  properties
        |
        |> Zigbee
        |     - Zigbee properties
        |
        |> New protocol 
        |     -  New protocol properties

~~~~~
{: #extprotmap title="Extended protocol mapping"}

As shown in {{extprotmap}}, a protocol mapping can be added by adding
a new technology specific extension to the schema. 

This is performed by adding the new protocol to the technology enum in
the base object definition {{objectdef}}

Furthermore, the protocol objects need to be extended with the new
protocol as well. Protocol objects will be extended as follows:

| Attribute  | Req |   Type |          Example                         |
+------------+-----+--------+------------------------------------------|
| ble        |  T  | object | an object with BLE-specific properties   |
| zigbee     |  T  | object | an object with Zigbee-specific properties|
| newProtocol|  T  | object | an object with newProtocol-specific props|
{: #newprotext title="Adding Protocol mappings"}

In the new protocol object, protocol specific properties can be added.

Protocol mappings need to be IANA registered.
 
## API extensions

/extension

The extension APIs allow for extensibility of the APIs, either IANA 
registered extensions or vendor-specific extensions.
Extension APIs must leverage the basic NIPC defined APIs and combine them in 
compound statements in order to streamline application operation against
devices, make operations more expediant and convenient in one API call.
In principle they do not add any basic functionality. In
the OpenAPI model {{openAPI}} below, we have defined a few example 
extensions.  

# NIPC Error Handling
{: #errorhandling}

The error codes in the NIPC APIs can be generic or specific to the API. 
The generic error codes reuse the HTTP status codes defined in {{!RFC9110}}.
The error codes for the action APIs are divided into the following
categories:  

 - 1000-1099: Errors related to Connection APIs
 - 1100-1199: Errors related to Property APIs
 - 1200-1299: Errors related to Subscription APIs
 - 1300-1399: Errors related to Broadcast APIs

The error codes for the registration APIs are further divided into the following
categories:  

 - 1400-1499: Errors related to Event Registration APIs
 - 1500-1599: Errors related to Property Registration APIs

For errors that are not specific to any API, the error codes have a 
value of 2000 or higher.

The error codes are also categorized according to the technology:  

 - xx00 - xx09: Generic
 - xx10 - xx19: BLE
 - xx20 - xx29: Zigbee
 - xx30 - xx99: Reserved for future use

The specific error codes are defined in the table below:

| Error Code | Description                                  | Category  |
|------------|----------------------------------------------|-----------|
| 1000       | Device already connected                     | action/connection |
| 1001       | No connection found for device               | action/connection |
| 1010       | BLE connection timeout                       | action/connection/ble |
| 1011       | BLE bonding failed                           | action/connection/ble |
| 1012       | BLE connection failed                        | action/connection/ble |
| 1013       | BLE service discovery failed                 | action/connection/ble |
| 1020       | Zigbee connection timeout                    | action/connection/zigbee |
| 1100       | Property not writeable                       | action/property |
| 1101       | Property not readable                        | action/property |
| 1110       | Invalid BLE service or characteristic ID     | action/property/ble |
| 1120       | Invalid Zigbee endpoint or cluster ID        | action/property/zigbee |
| 1200       | Subscription not found                       | action/subscription |
| 1201       | Subscription already started                 | action/subscription |
| 1210       | Invalid BLE service or characteristic ID     | action/subscription/ble |
| 1220       | Invalid Zigbee endpoint or cluster ID        | action/subscription/zigbee |
| 1300       | Invalid broadcast data                       | action/broadcast |
| 1400       | Invalid event identifier                     | registration/event |
| 1500       | Invalid property identifier                  | registration/property |
| 2000       | Generic catch-all error code for any API     | generic   |
| 2001       | Invalid device ID or gateway doesn't recognize the ID | generic   |
| 2002       | Property not found                           | generic   |
{: #errorcodes title="Error Codes"}

The appropriate HTTP status code is returned in the response. 

# Publish/Subscribe Interface

The publish/subscribe interface, or data streaming interface, is an MQTT
publishing interface. Pub/sub topics can be created and managed by means
of the /registration/event NIPC element.

In this memo, we propose the data format to be CBOR {{!RFC8949}}.

## CDDL Definition

We have a CDDL {{!RFC8610}} definition where we define the
DataSubscription struct that will be used by all the messages published 
to the MQTT broker. 

The DataSubscription struct is a CBOR map that will contain the raw data
in bytes and a timestamp of the data. Optionally, the message will also
have a deviceId that corresponds to the SCIM ID of the device if the 
payload is associated to a known device.

Other fields in the CDDL such as apMacAddress and rssi can be optionally
included but these fields can expose the underlying network topology.

Each message also has a subscription choice group that will define the
type of data that is being published.

~~~~ CDDL
{::include data_subscription.cddl}
~~~~
{:cddl}

## CBOR Examples

This section contains a few examples of the DataSubscription struct 
depicted in CBOR diagnostic notation.

~~~
{
    "data": h'02011A020A0C16FF4C001007721F41B0392078',
    "deviceId": "75fde96d-886f-4ac0-a1d5-df79f76e7c9c",
    "timestamp": 1727484393,
    "bleAdvertisement": {
        "macAddress": "C1:5C:00:00:00:01",
        "rssi": -25
    }
}
~~~
{: title="Onboarded BLE Device Advertisement" }

~~~
{
    "data": h'02011A020A0C16FF4C001007721F41B0392078',
    "timestamp": 1727484393,
    "bleAdvertisement": {
        "macAddress": "C1:5C:00:00:00:01",
        "rssi": -25
    }
}
~~~
{: title="Non-onboarded BLE Device Advertisement" }

~~~
{
    "data": h'434630374346303739453036',
    "deviceId": "75fde96d-886f-4ac0-a1d5-df79f76e7c9c",
    "timestamp": 1727484393,
    "bleSubscription": {
        "serviceId": "a4e649f4-4be5-11e5-885d-feff819cdc9f",
        "characteristicId": "c4c1f6e2-4be5-11e5-885d-feff819cdc9f"
    }
}
~~~
{: title="BLE GATT Notification" }

~~~
{
    "data": h'434630374346303739453036',
    "deviceId": "75fde96d-886f-4ac0-a1d5-df79f76e7c9c",
    "timestamp": 1727484393,
    "bleConnectionStatus": {
        "macAddress": "C1:5C:00:00:00:01",
        "connected": true
    }
}
~~~
{: title="BLE Connection status event" }

~~~
{
    "data": h'434630374346303739453036',
    "deviceId": "75fde96d-886f-4ac0-a1d5-df79f76e7c9c",
    "timestamp": 1727484393,
    "zigbeeSubscription": {
        "endpointId": 1,
        "clusterId": 6,
        "attributeId": 12,
        "type": 1
    }
}
~~~
{: title="Zigbee Attribute Notification" }

# Examples

This section contains a few examples on how applications can leverage 
NIPC operations to communicate with BLE and Zigbee devices.

## BLE Advertisement

In this example, we will onboard a device, and setup an advertisement
subscription event for that device.

The sequence of operations for this are:  

 - Onboard a device using the SCIM Interface (out of scope of this
   memo)
 - Register an eventc with the device id to subscribe to advertisements
   POST /register/event 
 - Subscribe to the topic from the data receiver app 
   MQTT subscribe topic

## BLE Property Read/Write

In this example, we will connect to a BLE device and read and write from a
property.

The sequence of operations for this are:  

 - Onboard a device using the SCIM Interface (out of scope of this
   memo)
 - Connect to the BLE device
   POST /action/connection 
 - Read a property from the BLE device
   GET  /action/property
 - Write to a property on the BLE device
   POST /action/property 
 - Disconnect from the BLE device
   DELETE /action/connection 

## Zigbee Property Read/Write

In this example, we will connect a zigbee device to a Zigbee mesh
and read and write from a property

The sequence of operations for this are:  

 - Onboard a device using the SCIM Interface (out of scope of this
   memo)
 - Connect the Zigbee device
   POST /action/connection 
 - Read a property from the Zigbee device
   GET  /action/property  
 - Write to a property on the Zigbee device
   POST  /action/property  
 - Disconnect from the Zigbee device
   DELETE /action/connection 

# Security Considerations

TBD.

# IANA Considerations

This section provides guidance to the Internet Assigned Numbers Authority
(IANA) regarding registration of values related to NIPC, in accordance
with {{!RFC8126}}.

## Protocol mapping

## API extensions

--- back

# OpenAPI definition

The following non-normative model is provide for convenience of
the implementor.

~~~~~~
<CODE BEGINS>
file "openapi.yml"
{::include nipc-openapi/NIPC_REST.yaml}
<CODE ENDS>
~~~~~~
{: #openAPI}
